Two forms of N-acetylation are recognized in E. coli: post-translational N-terminal acetylation of the \alpha Nitrogen, and post-translational modification of epsilon Nitrogen of lysine residues. Although cotranslational N-terminal Nalpha acetylation (NtAc) is widespread in eukaryotic proteins, the prevalence and physiological significance of this modification in prokaryotes is poorly understood. In E. coli, only five native proteins are known to possess an NtAc modification: the ribosomal proteins S5, S18, and L12/7[CITE Nesterchuk review]; elongation factor Tu (EFTu)[CITE]; and the chaperone SecB [CITE]. In addition, a number of heterologous eukaryotic proteins are modified with an NtAc when overexpressed in E. coli [CITE,CITE,CITE]. Surprisingly, we identified 4335 NtAc-modified peptides from 55 proteins across the 9 time points and 3 biological replicates of our glucose starvation data. Although the total number of N-terminal peptides recovered from these proteins remains constant across all 9 time points, there is a clear enrichment of NtAc-modified peptides beginning in early stationary phase (8h), continuing through late stationary phase (336h) [Fig. 1]

No N-terminal peptides were recovered from known targets S5, S18, L12/7, or EFTu, so we were unable to confirm the acetylation status of these proteins.  However, among the NtAC peptides that were recovered, the Nt fragment from secB was by far the most frequently observed, representing 15-41% of the total Nt-Acetylated peptides across the nine time points[Fig. 2]. In addition, six other proteins from our dataset were identified as Nt-acetylation targets in an enrichment-based analysis of N-terminal modifications in \emph{Pseudomonas aeruginosa} [Table 1]. The 49 novel Nt-acetylated proteins we identified span a variety of functional categories, including transcription (rpsH, yfgB, yjfH, lysS, cysS); amino acid metabolism (ilvA, serC, cysM, avtA); DNA repair and replication (ftsK, parE, mutS, xerD) and membrane transport (ytfT, secF, copA, potH, dppF, oppD, xanP, atpH) [see Table 2]. 

Three N-terminal N-alpha acetyltransferases (NATs) are known to regulate NtAc in E. coli: rimI, which acetylates the N-terminal Ala residue of S18; rimJ, which targets the Nt Ala residue of S5; and rimL, which targets the N-terminal Ser of L12. The E. coli genome also encodes four putative N-acetyltransferases (yjaB, yhhY, yjhQ, and yjgM) that have been suggested as candidate NATs. The acetyltransferases responsible for Nt-acetylation of non-ribosomal proteins have not been identified, although RimJ [CITE] and RimL [CITE,CITE] have been shown to be responsible for NtAc of ectopically expressed eukaryotic proteins.  Little is known about the features governing target specificity of the rim proteins; although specificity of eukaryotic NATs is largely dependent on the first AA residue following the iMet, mutation studies have shown that prokaryotic Rim protein specificity is largely unaffected by AA-1 mutations[CITE], but can be drastically changed by substitutions in downstream AA positions[CITE].  The AA-1 position in our 56 E. coli NtAc proteins are largely made up of Ser (34), Thr (10), and Ala (5) residues, and all but 3 have undergone iMet cleavage.  Although there is a slight bias for Ser, Thr, Asp, Glu, and Gln at the AA2 position, sequence alignment and motif enrichment analysis were unable to identify any downstream targeting signal (Data not shown). Alternatively, some of the observed Nt-acetylation may take place via a non-enzymatic mechanism, as has recently been shown for Lys N-epsilon acetylation in E. coli[CITE Weinert2013,Wolfe2014]. Nonenzymatic Lys acetylation increases in stationary phase similarly to our observations for NtAc levels, and is associated with accumulation of the high-energy intermediate acetyl phosphate. Nonenzymatic Lys acetylation is thought to act as a sensing system for high levels of cellular acetate metabolism, and interestingly, a similar relationship between Acetyl-CoA levels and Nt-acetylation has recently been shown for eukaryotic proteins[CITE]. 

NtAc has a variety of functions in eukaryotic cells, including regulating protein stability, ER trafficking, protein complex formation, and membrane attachment[CITE Starheim Review], but there is no evidence for a similar role in prokaryotic cells. Nt acetylation of E. coli 30S ribosomal subunits S5 and S18 is thought to affect 30S ribosomal assembly by governing direct contacts with the rRNA[CITE 2013 paper], but no function for prokaryotic Nt acetylation outside of the ribosome has been proposed. Our observation of widespread NtAc in E. coli proteins suggests that this PTM is broadly important for protein homeostasis, but further work will be necessary to determine its effects on target proteins and the mechanisms of its regulation.

Legends:
Fig. 1: N-terminal Nalpha Acetylated Peptide Occurance across Growth Timepoints.  Blue line represents total count of N-terminal peptides with any (or no) modification originating from parent proteins with at least one Nt-acetylated peptide in the dataset.  Green line represents total count of Nt-acetylated peptides from these proteins.  Both counts are the sum of three biological replicates for each timepoint. Dashed line (right axis) shows OD600 values for an example culture grown under identical glucose-starvation conditions. 

Fig. 2: N-terminal acetylated peptides show differing patterns of NtAc across growth timepoints. Counts for all peptides the protein's N-terminus and containing an Nt-acetylation were summed across three biological replicates for each timepoint.  Color intensity shows log2-transformed, non-normalized NtAc peptide count for each timepoint. Proteins (rows) are sorted by mean abundance across all timepoints, with most abundant at the top.
